Freud's Group Psychology and the History of the Crowd
by Daniel Pick

Contexts
Two questions: how should we place Freud's remarkable paper Group Psychology and the Analysis of the Ego (1921) in the history of the representation of crowds, masses and mobs? And how might this work be brought to bear upon nationalism and national identity in particular, politics in general? For whilst uneven and in some ways tantalisingly cursory, Freud's foray into group psychology, I will argue, cannot simply be consigned to the methodological past or explained away as just another example in the eccentric and odiously anti-democratic canon of early crowd 'science'. It poses problems not only of an historical but also of a political and psychological nature. In short its concern with the unconscious in collective experience and with the identity of the group and the individual merit attention and reappraisal. Whilst we may endeavour to situate the work in its formative contexts, we may also need to recognise its power to displace us from our own.

{This 'work in progress' is a longer version of a talk given at the University of East London Seminar Series on Psychoanalysis and History. My thanks to its organisers, Sally Alexander and Barbara Taylor, and also its participants for a number of helpful comments. The editors of the current issue in addition to Gareth Stedman Jones and Lyndal Roper, as well as Nick Stargardt, Isobel Banks, Irma and Eric Brenman, Tim Allen and Melissa Parker have been generous in their encouragement and advice.}

Where does Group Psychology belong? Ascribing it a clear place in the historiography of the crowd or even in the history of Freud's oeuvre is easier said than done. There are a number of possible contexts. Freud's editors suggest that the idea came to him in Spring 1919 (two years before it appeared in book-form), but that it also relates to Totem and Taboo (1912-13). Is the text best described as exemplary of post-1918 disarray in European culture and society, a symptomatic response to the political turmoil of the conflict's aftermath? There are also brief but striking allusions to shellshock and Prussian militarism that might encourage us to link Freud's group psychological impetus directly with the experience of the war itself. Yet the difficulty about locating the paper in the setting of 1914-18 or its immediate wake owes something to the relative abstraction of much of the discussion as well as Freud's own doubts, frequently expressed elsewhere, about whether the contemporary disaster marked anything new in the psychological field. Sometimes he seemed persuaded that it had disclosed phenomena which had been there all the time, more or less concealed, and about which he himself had known all along. 'I cannot be an optimist', he wrote to Lou Andreas-Salome in 1915, 'and I believe I differ from the pessimists only in that wicked, stupid, senseless things don't upset me, because I have accepted them from the beginning as part of what the world is made of.'
Certainly the Great War led many other commentators to rethink or elaborate on group mentality; Trotter's Instincts of the Herd in War and Peace (1916) is one such example. In Freud's view it said too little about the role of leaders. Nonetheless he found it a stimulating and thoughtful piece on instinct and collective processes, albeit a touch too redolent of the war's own group dynamics, prone to be propagandistic in approach. Whilst the war-time era does not simply overshadow Freud's thought or determine the terms of his concern and his pessimism, his text certainly bears some traces of its most unforgettable experiences. Freud would sometimes declare that he knew full well he could not exempt himself, as individual, from the collective allegiance, mania or sheer vertigo, from the war in which two of his own sons were fighting; after all this was a conflagration about whose debut he famously remarked 'all my libido was given to Austro-Hungary'. Strikingly the two key examples he provides are the church and the army. Freud suggests that they are subject to the same forces, as though to raise the possibility that wars are deeply imbued with religious impulses and religions with the desire for a crusade. In his account, love and hate are powerfully, perhaps inextricably, intertwined. Freud's study can also be situated after the Russian Revolution (which characteristically aroused his scepticism) and after a sizable experience of the acute group processes at issue in the history of the psychoanalytic movement itself. The latter history does not figure explicitly although he alludes to socialism as the heir to the church, indeed to 'the Wars of Religion'.
Much of Group Psychology is pitched at a formidably generic level, as though defying any glib attempt to explain it Thus, for instance, the theme of hypnotism does not lead Freud back to 1914's mass enthusiasm, nor to the various sagas of mesmerism in the previous century, but rather to notions of archaic inheritance. Hypnotism is a key term of the paper and Freud concludes that uncanny processes are at stake in it. Uncanniness, we know from his 1919 study of the subject, suggests something old and familiar that has undergone repression. Hypnotism, Freud argues, reactivates an early relation to parents and perhaps echoes the primal horde's attitude towards the primal father. He concludes that hypnotism is solidly founded on a predisposition which has survived in the unconscious from the early history of the human family. But the more he says about hypnotism in Group Psychology, the less confident Freud suggests we ought to be about its explanation. Forces are at work in the procedure to which the hypnotist lays claim, whose nature still remains to be resolved. The historical and mythic reach of the hypnotic process is vast and enigmatic. The hypnotist asserts that he is in possession of a power that robs the subject of his own will, 'or, which is the same thing, the subject believes it of him. This mysterious power (which is even now often described popularly as 'animal magnetism') must be the same power that is looked upon by primitive people as the source of taboo, the same that emanates from kings and chieftains and makes it dangerous to approach them (mana).'
Freud's discourse on collective hypnotic processes can be contextualised in terms of the history of crowd studies, the institutional and conceptual evolution of psychoanalysis and the political history of the twentieth century, 'the age of extremes' as Hobsbawm has now designated it. *{* The history of the appropriation of hypnotism as key model for the scientific understanding of crowds is a complex one and takes one back at least to those late-nineteenth-century pioneers of social psychology Gustave Le Bon, Scipio Sighele and Gabriel Tarde. The golden age of this type of work was perhaps within the period from the 1890s (which saw the appearance and rapid translation of Le Bon's The Crowd. A Study of the Popular Mind) to the inter-war years. Across that period, European thought underwent, as H. Stuart Hughes informs us, a profound 'reorientation' (Consciousness and Society: The Reorientation of European Social Thought, 1890-1930, 1958). Freud's concern with the mesmerized human throng can be made to take its place alongside other troubled inquiries into the deeper nature of democracy, charisma, elites and the limits of human rationality, charted by Hughes.} Freud uses Le Bon and others, for instance McDougall, as a spring-board but writes the book in relation to his own experiences and observations of those 'extremes', anti-Semitism, ethnic and nationalist fervour, idealisation, violence and war. Biography, military affairs, religious history, the wider context of the human sciences: all may be brought to bear in attempts to locate this complicated and in some ways, as Peter Gay suggests, exceptionally untidy publication. In his biography, Freud: A Life for our Time (1988), Gay refers to the text 'throwing out suggestions'; he notes its 'breathless brevity', its 'air of improvisation' and describes how its postscript is replete with 'miscellaneous material Freud had failed to integrate into the body of the essay'. Some truth no doubt in that, but it would be a mistake to follow Gay in allocating priority so quickly to individual over group psychology; the sequence, I suggest, remains quite ambiguous in Freud's account as well as in more recent psychoanalytic thought.*{* The intriguing post-war legacy of psychoanalytic group studies is most notably represented in the writing and teaching of Wilfred Bion (see, for instance, Experiences in Groups and other Papers, 1961). In this tradition, the very process of thinking came to be inconceivable unless we recognise, all the way along, the involvement of more than one person: the infant comes to think through the containing and metabolising function of another, ordinarily its mother.} Gay rightly observes that Freud came to realise that individual and social psychology are impossible to separate, but he then claims that Freud's work shows that crowd psychology and with it all social psychology 'is parasitic on individual psychology'. * *{* * The charge of parasitism is interesting since it echoes 'cannibalism' which is a fleeting theme of the book itself. Gay uses the word 'parasitic' to describe a one-way feeding off, whilst Freud seems to cast doubt upon the viability of the terms, 'group' and 'individual', and the ways in which they nourish one another; for that matter he also brings into question both the provenance and the emotional nature of cannibalism, the 'devouring affection' he finds at stake in it.} Freud surely causes us to hesitate between the two, at one point declaring group psychology 'the oldest human psychology', at another that individual and group psychology must be as old as one another.
I began by saying that one way to read Group Psychology is to draw on history; to situate Freud's ideas in the past. Of course, readers may choose to consider Freud's paper in altogether different terms. Are groups (or even Freud's investigation of groups) most interestingly understood within some relatively localised historical frame of reference? Freud asks what is a group; the very concept itself is at stake. We should not simply take for granted 'the group' or 'the crowd' in history. The question and the problem could be framed in other ways, anthropologically, philosophically, psychologically. Another example: linguistics has caused us to ask what is the first person plural. The problem of the 'join' between 'I' and 'we' in language is profound. The first person plural, it has even been suggested, is a misnomer. Jakobson proposed the category of 'shifters' to refer to the characteristics of a certain class of grammatical entity which cannot be defined other than with reference to a specific message within which it is inscribed. In this account, developed by Benveniste, the first person singular pronoun, far from belonging to the most elementary and primitive stratum of language, is described as one of the most peculiarly complex verbal signs, acquired only with considerable difficulty by the child and one of the first to be lost in aphasia. 'You' is also a shifter and linked on the same axis with 'I' since it cannot be thought outside of a situation posed by 'I'. In short, 'you' opposes 'I' as the non-subjective person with regard to the subjective person which 'I' represents. 'We' is also very complex. It is 'I' plus 'non-I' whether you, he, she or it, you (plural) or they. It is thus a 'false' plural, something indicated in most languages by the change in sign - hence 'I' becomes 'we' instead of 'Is'; 'je' becomes 'nous' instead of 'jes'. Benveniste has declared in his Problems in General Linguistics (1971) that 'It is clear, in effect, that the oneness and the subjectivity inherent in "I" contradict the possibility of pluralization.'
I am suggesting that Freud also brings the meanings of 'I' and 'we' into question. For in the end, are there two domains, group psychology and individual psychology? If so which is the parasite and which is the host? How do the cacophony of voices, figures, objects - the whole jostling crowd - come together into the mysterious and always troubling notion of the self? What has been digested and/or expelled in the process? Does a 'plural' underlie, or give the lie to, the concept of the first person singular? To what extent can history or politics provide an adequate account of the 'making' of the self? Do either of the domains of psychology survive the encounter intact? And if not, what can be built from the conceptual debris?

Identifications
Freud's book has twelve sections: after an introduction, there is a detailed description of Le Bon's version of the group mind as well as some discussion of other contemporary theories. This leads in turn to sections on suggestion and libido as well as some consideration of two 'artificial groups', the church and the army. After passages on further complications - what constitutes a group, intolerance, neighbours and so on - we are offered accounts of identification, being in love and hypnosis, the herd instinct, the group and the primal horde, the relation of the ego and the ego ideal, and finally a postscript. I want to stress a few particular themes from the study: the tenuous viability of the distinction between individual and group psychology; the ieturn to the question of the hypnotic state; the relevance of the concept of transference to the understanding of group processes and the problem of identification. Freud undercuts the traditional 'social psychology' notion of a relationship between a pre-given individual and a group, by making the important point that the opposition between 'individual psychology' and 'social psychology' is itself secondary to the more fundamental opposition between 'narcissistic psychic acts' and 'social psychic acts', all of which fall within the domain of individual psychology.*{* These internal 'social psychic acts' do away with the possibility of a 'sociology of the crowd', to draw on Borch-Jacobsen's characterisation of Freud's departure (see The Freudian Subject, 1989 and The Emotional Tie, 1993); after Freud we need an 'archisociology' of the individual. Where Le Bon and co. pose an unproblematic 'individual' who then meets - or avoids - others, Freud shows the degree to which these terms are inter-related from the beginning. As he writes: 'In the individual's mental life someone else is invariably involved, as a model, as an object, as a helper, as an opponent; and so from the very first individual psychology, in this extended but entirely justifiable sense of the words, is at the same time social psychology as well.' The point is that 'my' relation to others, is itself basic to the very constitution of 'me' as subject, not simply some external relationship an already formed individual has with figures or crowds in the external world.}
In discussing the inseparability of self and group, Freud mentions the relation of the individual to parents, siblings, love objects and even the physician - 'in fact all the relations which have hitherto been the chief subject of psycho-analytic research'; all of these 'may claim to be considered as social phenomena'. These can be contrasted with other processes, which he describes as 'narcissistic', 'in which the satisfaction of the instincts is partially or totally withdrawn from the influence of other people'. Complications arise, however at this point. The relation of the patient to the physician, on which Freud touches, raises, in a psychoanalytic sense, not just the issue of a social relationship or transaction, but also a transferential situation: an internal world and history are transferred on to that external figure. Earlier experiences, emotions, anxieties, are lodged in, repeated through, this relationship; but even if we go back to those parent-child-sibling relations to which Freud also refers, we are not simply looking at the 'imprint' of a social situation on the psyche but something more complex; the unconscious conception of those figures does not merely follow an encounter with actual people. Inside/outside; subject/ group; expectation/social experience are extremely difficult to disentangle.
A further problem also takes shape in Freud's contrast of the 'narcissistic' and the 'social'. Narcissism is contrasted with the group's emotional ties, but perhaps is also perpetuated alongside them. Freud does not clarify whether 'self-love' may be described as a feature of the group itself. He argues that 'self-love' is modified by libidinal feelings towards others, but also stresses how the group bond is sustained by hatred of what is different. (In the light of Benveniste's claim about the tenuousness of 'we' as a simple plural, mentioned above, a model of 'group narcissism' would raise a conceptual difficulty; if self-love occurs in the first person singular, would the group's narcissism be merely a pluralisation of individual processes or something else?). In any event the group's positive internal bond is not complete. Inside the smallest happy band or the fondest pairs - siblings, lovers, parents, parent and child, to say nothing of business partners, neighbours and so forth - the capacity for hatred lurks. Surprisingly, in the light of what he writes elsewhere, there is one relationship Freud (in a footnote in Group Psychology) seeks to exempt altogether from the corrosive power of ambivalence: that of the mother and son. On this occasion, he sees the relationship as based on narcissism and thus as free of subsequent rivalry.
Fundamental to the experience of the group in Freud's explanation is the process of identification. This is a very complicated concept in psychoanalysis as anyone can judge by consulting the entry in Laplanche and Pontalis' scholarly dictionary of psychoanalytic terms. In their opinion, identification comes little by little to be not simply one psychical mechanism among others but 'the operation itself whereby the human subject is constituted'. In Freud's second theory of the psychical apparatus, those agencies that become differentiated from the id - i.e. ego and superego - 'are given their specific characters by the identifications of which they are the outcome'.*{* It should be noted that Group Psychology was written as Freud was in the process of elaborating the second mental topography of 'id', 'ego' and 'superego' (see particularly The Ego and the Id, 1923). In this new schema, 'the intrasubjective field tends to be conceived of after the fashion of intersubjective relations, and the systems are pictured as relatively autonomous persons-within-the-person . . .' (Laplanche and Pontalis, entry for 'Topography', The Language of Psychoanalysis, 1985).} From the early work on hysteria onwards, the concept of identification was gradually refined; it relates importantly to the idea of oral incorporation, to the concept of narcissism and to the theory of the Oedipus complex. In Group Psychology, identification is shown to take several forms and even then to be far from exhausted by the author's account; the ego may variously unite itself with the loved, hated or feared object. Identification, Freud declares, is ambivalent from the very start. He reaches three conclusions; it is the original emotional tie with the object; in a regressive way it becomes a substitute for a libidinal object-tie as it were by means of an introjection of the object into the ego; thirdly, it may arise with any new perception of a common quality shared with a person who is not an object of the sexual instinct. The mutual bond between members of a group suggests identification of the latter kind. The group is held together by an important common quality, an emotional investment in the leader. Thus in the group identification operates at least on two lines: with the leader (or rather the leader identified with the ego ideal) as well as with the others who are led.
Identification may also occur for instance in a situation where for some members of the group a direct relationship with the object is left out. Freud cites the situation of a boarding school, in which a girl receives a letter from a person she is secretly in love with; the letter arouses her jealousy, resulting in hysterics; friends catch the fit in a process of infection and imitation founded upon the wish to put themselves in the same situation. The others, as Freud puts it, 'would like to have a secret affair too, and dominated by a sense of guilt, they share in the suffering it presupposes'. But the primary motive is not sympathy; the latter emerges out of the process of identification: 'The identification by means of the symptom has thus become the mark of a point of coincidence between the two egos which has to be kept repressed.' Identification may involve the desire to 'be' or to 'have' or perhaps indeterminately elements of both, which is another way of saying it depends on whether the tie is to the subject or the object of the ego. In a later vignette, he alludes to an adoring troop of women and girls crowding around a musical hero. Each renounces the aim of exclusive possession, acting instead as a united group, paying homage to the singer or pianist of the occasion with common adulation. Leaving aside for the moment the question of the gender of the groups in these examples (which of course is not allocated by chance and which, as will be discussed below, linked closely with prevalent assumptions about the fundamental femininity of crowd processes, indeed of the crowd per se), the point is that identification can occur, as it were sideways. *{* Some of the theoretical repercussions of the boarding school example within the context of the various forms of identification postulated in Group Psychology are traced in detail in Rena Grant's essay 'Characterhysterics: Identification in Freud and Lacan', Oxford Literary Review, (vol. 15, 1993).} Freud also takes these instances as emblematic of a wider social move towards 'egalitarianism' whose proclamation tends to involve a fundamental denial of other underlying emotions. The spirit of equality uneasily suppresses the envy and differences which exist within the group: 
What appears later on in society in the shape of Gemeingeist, esprit de corps, 'group spirit', etc., does not belie its derivation from what was originally envy. No one must want to put himself forward, everyone must be the same and have the same. Social justice means that we deny ourselves many things so that others may have to do without them as well, or, what is the same thing, may not be able to ask for them. 
Hostility or destructiveness takes on an opposite hue as extreme solicitousness for the state of others. Freud ascribes the syphilitic's dread of infecting the healthy to the sufferer's terror of achieving a desire; in short the afflicted violently struggles against the unconscious wish to spread the disease: why should not other people endure it as well? The argument moves between drastic cases of suffering, resentment or violence and everyday relationships; between the exotic, the primitive and the universal. What emerges so powerfully from his discussion is the massive psychic complexity as well as the visceral intensity of identification. Thus Freud refers to the cannibal who has a 'devouring affection' for his enemies, who literally eats what he likes; but so too does the baby, taking in something of mother's very substance at each feed in a process which has affectionate and sadistic components from the start. For Freud, the process of eating was the very prototype of psychic introjection and for this reason the 'civilised' are from their earliest infancy no less complex consumers than the 'cannibals' to whom he draws our attention.
Freud writes that the evidence of psycho-analysis shows that the sediment of feelings of aversion and hostility in intimate relationships only escape perception as a result of repression. Behind later protestations of simple love, devotion or respect lie more primitive feasts between parents and children or siblings. One might refer here to the banquets of tragic dramas such as Thyestes which force recognition, after the event, that what has been bitten off is more than the protagonist can bear to chew. In a more commonplace way, the expression, 'to feast one's eyes upon someone' perhaps also captures something of the ambiguity, between devouring incorporation and an appreciation which recognises difference. Freud's stress on the cannibalistic components of identification is interesting in the context of the history of crowd psychology. After all, the mob's greedy power, or more than that its fundamental need, to subsume individuals or victims in its path was a theme which Lombroso, Sighele, Le Bon and others had sought to pinpoint in their earlier investigations: cannibalism as the regressive manifestation of primitive crowds, for instance, whose presentday riots and disorders these investigators anxiously recorded (often in rural hinterlands, but sometimes still more alarmingly in the great cities) and cross-referenced to the violent historical past (notably the excesses of the French Revolution). *{* Freud notes in Group Psychology: 'The characteristics of revolutionary groups, and especially those of the great French Revolution, have unmistakably influenced their [the crowd psychologists'] descriptions.' The revolutionary mob became the potentiality of all agglomerations of people, so at least it was often argued. Or to put it differently, violence, aggression, murderousness were all, at best, latent within the group. So far Freud may well have agreed, but he also demonstrated that the dichotomy between the violent group and the figure of a peaceable, self-contained, rational 'individual' was untenable.} The concept returns in Freud as a universal potential: the crowd is cannibalistic, yes; but so are the very first processes of identification.
'Identification' raises other problems which there is no space to develop here. For instance, it is not easy to define the difference between hypnosis and being in love: 'There is the same humble subjection, the same compliance, the same absence of criticism, towards the hypnotist as towards the loved object. There is the same sapping of the subject's own initiative'. The hypnotic relation 'is the unlimited devotion of someone in love, but with sexual satisfaction excluded'. No one can doubt, Freud writes, that the hypnotist has stepped into the place of the ego ideal since it is this component of mental life which monitors reality: 'No wonder that the ego takes a perception for real if its reality is vouched for by the mental agency which ordinarily discharges the duty of testing the reality of things.' The ego ideal is a term which has a complex history in Freud; it refers to that composite internal figure, derived from narcissistic idealisation of the ego as well as identification with parents, or with substitute figures or collective ideals. 'It is only that everything is even clearer and more intense in hypnosis, so that it would be more to the point to explain being in love by means of hypnosis than the other way round.' Freud states that the hypnotic relationship is a group with two members. Indeed he ventures to add that it is not a good object for comparison with a group formation because it is identical with it. The hypnotic relationship is understood as the group dynamic par excellence.
Strikingly it is upon the fantasy of perfectly distributed love inside the group that Freud concentrates. For in the church and the army, solidarity is retained through the myth of the leader who loves all his flock or troops equally. Everything, muses Freud, depends on this illusion. 'This equal love was expressly enunciated by Christ: "Inasmuch as you have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me." He stands to the individual members of the group of believers in the brother; he is their substitute father.' The army has an equally libidinal structure, he subversively argues, and it is founded on the radical exclusion of women. (How this point might be related to the examples of the female groups described above merits further investigation). Of course, symbolically a 'Helen' may well be the ostensible motive for the actions of embattled men. As Freud writes: 'In the lying poetic fancies of prehistoric times the woman, who had been the prize of battle and the temptation to murder, was probably turned into the active seducer and instigator to crime.' Yet the religious and military institutions, according to this argument, are inhospitable to heterosexual desire. Freud: 'In the great artificial groups, the Church and the army, there is no room for woman as a sexual object. The love relation between men and women remains outside these organisations.' Even in groups formed by both men and women, 'the distinction between the sexes' plays no part. 'There is scarcely any sense in asking whether the libido which keeps groups together is of a homosexual or of a heterosexual nature, for it is not differentiated according to the sexes, and particularly shows a complete disregard for the aims of the genital organisation of the libido.' On the other hand: 'It seems certain that homosexual love is far more compatible with group ties, even where it takes the shape of uninhibited sexual impulsions - a remarkable fact, the explanation of which might carry us far.' Love for the opposite sex, Freud contends, is a powerful disintegrative force against the group ties of nation and the class system, and it produces diverse effects in the process of civilisations. The dire dilemma of lovers torn by clan or family animosity is of course so often the stuff of tragedy.

In the plural
'Group Psychology' or 'Mass Psychology'? The problems start with the translation of Freud's terms themselves, as the translators acknowledged at the beginning of the English version. To replace the German 'Massenpsychologie' by 'Group Psychology' is too tame, as Gay points out; moreover the shift from 'Ich-Analyse' to 'The Analysis of the Ego' brings back to the more distanced, in this case Latinised, vocabulary of the English edition. But the familiar dilemmas of translating Freud are on this occasion part of a wider conundrum about the implications of a whole range of terms and contrasts running through the history of thought on groups and crowds. We are aware of the tendentious nature of the habitual contrasts: crowd versus mob; mass versus individual; elite versus mass; leader versus followers, group versus herd. For Freud, however, something powerfully real is certainly at stake in group psychology; as a concept it is no mere chimera to be discarded, however shadowy its exact nature. Freud ponders the best group designation. If human beings are social animals, then of precisely what kind? In a nice quip on Trotter's earlier book, Freud says that man is not a herd animal (ein Herdentier), but a horde animal (ein Hordentier); he returns to the idea of the primal horde developed in Totem and Taboo, a notion which he had derived in turn from Darwin's speculations about human origins. Our ancestral history, all those prior phylogenetic group experiences, become part of our make-up. Primitive man survives potentially in every individual and he postulates that the primal horde may erupt once more out of any random collection of people. In that sense for Freud, the individual is marked early on by the group in a double sense: early in evolutionary history as well as early in individual development.
Herds, hordes, crowds, leaders, mobs, masses, elites: all these terms and conceptual oppositions were given new putatively scientific expression in the late nineteenth century. They all provoke hesitation or opposition today. Freud's 'primal horde' theory, for instance, was to be scathingly dismissed by many later anthropologists, not least by Evans-Pritchard (see his Theories of Primitive Religion, 1965). To take a quite different example, some critics, notably Raymond Williams, have claimed, in the context of a certain 'elitist' literary critical belittling of 'mass civilization', that there is no such thing as 'a mass', only ways of looking at people in these denigratory terms. Williams went on to look at how a more active version of popular consent or participation was confused with a spurious 'democratic' legitimation of mere mass provision, consumption or distribution. For Le Bon, one hundred years ago, the urgent political issue was different and the notion of democracy much less self-evidently beneficial: yet he wanted politicians to face up to the terrifying reality that the modern age was the age of the crowd and the mass, those collective beings who were in his view so unmistakably inferior to the individual, indeed who operated quite literally at a lower rung on the racial evolutionary ladder. Few commentators today would declare an allegiance or a debt to him, yet Freud takes him very seriously, albeit with various cautionary notes. Crucially, he is sceptical of Le Bon's claim that of themselves numbers introduce anything new into human psychology. Indeed in other respects too Freud is doubtful about the novelty of the whole field of group psychology, at least in its findings to date. Le Bon had offered nothing very original by way of explanation, Freud declares at one point, but he convincingly describes crowd behaviour. Whilst everything to be found in his writings had already been expressed elsewhere with equal distinctness and hostility, Freud makes clear that he draws so heavily on Le Bon because his account fits well with the psychoanalytic emphasis upon unconscious mental life.
If we are less confident than Freud that Le Bon could reliably enlighten about anything other than his own profound ambitions and anxieties, this is not to say that we ought to be more confident about the well-worn phrases our own history writing and political analysis; instead of talking of crowd or group psychology, the phrases of the moment are 'collective identity' or 'national identity'. Yet these terms raise complications which run back into those areas of late-nineteenth-century ambiguity. I am not sure when the terms 'collective identity' or 'national identity' were first used, but they occlude two forms of difficulty. What do historians mean by identity and then what do we mean by magnifying that to take in a group, a collectivity or a nation? Or indeed are we talking about 'magnification' of the individual experience at all; is it rather the reverse? How do these concepts interlock? And how does the wider culture and ideology of place or community come into the picture? Before Freud's account, it can be argued, crowd theory took the individual to precede the group, as concept; after Freud, we are not so sure. To borrow an expression from Marx that Freud's Group Psychology takes to a quite different level, human beings are social animals through and through. One of my motivations in writing this paper was the sense that so many of the books on collective allegiances over the last decade or two fail to address the issues which Freud raises. It is these concerns I want to present here for discussion. How the basic psychological processes of identity-formation shape and are shaped by specific 'national identifications' has certainly not been fully engaged to date, although both in the work of classic pioneers of sociology and in a spectrum of recent landmark books and films, one could no doubt start to draw out relevant material and evocative questions; for instance Eugen Weber's Peasants into Frenchmen (1976), which explores the pedagogical and political process of inculcating a sense of nationality in the later nineteenth century; or in a quite different register, the Taviani brothers' film Padre Padrone which juxtaposes the experience of a harsh Sardinian peasant childhood with the traumatic ('emancipatory'?) moment of entry into the national army and language. Rich material. But in the recent discussions of national allegiance, many problems remain unaddressed about what it means, whether now or in the past, to have an identity at all. How far can a history of the nation or of nationalist discourse take us in this direction? How far can our identities be said to be 'shared'?
In recent years, 'identity' has received a great deal more philosophical and psychoanalytic interrogation than the collectivist extrapolations made from it. We are frequently reminded of the historical nature of the very concepts of 'ourselves'. The meanings of our lives are decisively shaped but are not definitively fixed, a priori, by either nature or nurture: psychoanalysis itself after all has come less and less to be a procedure committed to the mere recovery of early repressed truths (the buried secrets of the past). More and more it has been to do with the question of what the patient does with his or her own sense of the past, of history, and of the experience of the analysis itself; of the transference as it operates here and now. In the history of Freud's work, and all the more so in subsequent practice, the analysis was to be, increasingly, of the analytic relation itself. In the wake of psychoanalysis, modernism and various currents in continental philosophy, it has become a commonplace for today's cultural critics to refer to 'identity' as a kind of 'self-fashioning' or a running autobiography (which makes rather than merely represents 'the self'; a process of self-narration which tells a story or perhaps history of identity as we go along). Thus Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak in her collection of essays, Machine (1993) says, 'Identity is a very different word from essence. We "write" a running biography with life-language rather than only word-language in order to "be". Call this identity!', whilst from a quite different intellectual formation, Charles Taylor's Sources of the Self: The Making of Modern Identity (1989) points out that 'we come to think that we "have" selves as we have heads. But the very idea that we have or are "a self', that human agency is essentially defined as "the self", is a linguistic reflection of our modern understanding and the radical reflexivity it involves. Being deeply embedded in this understanding, we cannot but reach for this language; but it was not always so.' Without becoming further engrossed in the contexts of these comments, or with Taylor's notion of the emergence of a modern sense of 'inwardness' and 'depth', it should be pointed out that despite the long-enduring critique of the category of the subject, or claims for its modern 'dispersal', to say nothing of the undermining of the notion of the individual, nobody seriously imagines we could think without these concepts. As Taylor observes, we cannot but reach for this language. However thoroughly they are analysed, the terms of this discussion never become empty concepts or formulae. In Jean-Luc Nancy's arch, if witty, title to a collection of Parisian philosophical essays, the question is Who Comes After the Subject? (1991): 'who', not 'what'.
If we turn to a very different discursive milieu, Daniel Stem's empiricist investigation, The Interpersonal World of the Infant (1985), we are told that the sense of self pre-exists a knowledge of subjectivity, in a linguistic sense. Replete with myriad experimental examples, Stern's book develops a theory of different forms of the self which emerge in infancy and overlap across our lives. Whilst it is often striking how little contact exists between the approaches mentioned above, nevertheless much recent experimental work in developmental psychology now bears out - or at least enters into dialogue with - the bold clinical work, observations of and intuitions on early infancy of Melanie Klein. But the relationship of identity, self or subject to language ,acquisition remains vexed indeed: for can we ask, 'Who comes before the Subject?' and if so, that would an answer look like, if not to be in the form of 'I do', 'you do' or 'we do'? One might turn to literature and imagine what would have happened had James Joyce pushed the language of A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man back earlier than the 'infant-speak' of its opening pages. Of course for Joyce to begin with those early words was itself a powerful rejoinder to a Victorian novelistic sense of the worthwhile starting point of a life's narrative. What happens when we try to pass, in thought, to the other side of language, our earliest listening and murmuring, heard or spoken sounds? We know that babies can recognise their mother tongue, or rather their mother's tongue, at an extremely early stage, long before they can speak it. But the experimental demonstration of a baby's capacities for 'recognition' is a far cry from knowledge of what the mental experience of the baby (or even fetus) is actually like. Many writers and theorists have attempted to provide approximations, but the incommensurability of description with preverbal experience cannot be ignored. *{* The question of when and how, as infants, we come to represent ourselves internally to ourselves (if not from the very beginning), to know our own physical and psychological boundedness remains much debated. Many strands of thought and speculation have developed around these issues. For instance, is there, as has been contentiously suggested by some French as well as British psychoanalysts, from birth (or before) some form of phantasy of the skin which separates inside and outside? And if so how does this carry over into later life? To take another example of recent inquiry, one researcher, using ultrasound, has argued that aspects of our character are already clearly discernible in fetal behaviour in the womb and moreover that the rapport (or lack of it) which can be observed between twins before and after birth displays striking continuities (see Piontelli's From Fetus to Child, 1992). The relationship between observation of the fetus or neonate and an attempt to give as it were an interior account of early experience no doubt will lead to abundant further experiment and stimulating hypotheses. Certainly the nature of language acquisition, the capacity for symbolism and how we may know our own minds - or mindedness - before we speak them, remain vexed and difficult questions. In Kleinian thought, a sense of the divide between self and other is understood to run back much earlier than the individual's purchase on language. But if a divide is presumed, so too is the fact that the (potential) subject is filled, from the start, by fragmentary internal objects.}
To what extent, however, are the questions of the nature of identity in the group and in the individual distinct? It is difficult to keep the differentiation wholly intact; even if we resort to the OED, we find that whilst 'individual' is contrasted with generality and may mean 'indivisible, inseparable', it can also include 'a group of things regarded as a unit'. The dictionary entry for 'identity' stresses sameness, repetition and continuity. Can these meanings underpin a conception of collective identity? If identity is precisely what makes each of us feel continuous with ourselves (although not necessarily at one with ourselves) and if it is what makes us feel different from others, is collective identity anything more than a longing, which does not belong to the group at all, but which resides at the paradoxical heart of individual identity? Paradoxical, since our sense of separation and of oneness may itself emerge out of the social bonds, and the internal conceptualisation of those bonds, which produced our tenuous sense of oneness in the first place. Further questions that need to be put to the theorists of national identity follow, such as whether a stress on the myths, ideologies, shibboleths of nations really adds up to the decidedly psychological notion of collective identity?
These issues have yet to be fully worked through in the historiography of nationalism. Indeed Freud in particular or psychoanalysis in general have no explanatory or even question-raising role in many of the landmarks of the recent literature, such as Hobsbawm's Nations and Nationalism (1990), as though the bad name of 'psychohistory' or of Freud's speculative excesses might enable one to by-pass these questions altogether. The neglect is surely undue. Writings such as Benedict Anderson's Imagined Communities (1983) have provided a powerful stimulus to new debate. But can this approach provide, beyond its telling critique of the myths and historical trajectory of nationalism, the means to investigate 'identity', individual or collective? Can the theoretical, the historical and, as it were, the clinical levels of understanding identities, sketched in this paper, be brought together, and if so in what form? Tom Nairn's often scintillating examination of the monarchy, The Enchanted Glass (1988), provides another important example. It is a study if ever there was one on collective enchantment or what the crowd psychologists might have called the hypnotic; yet it barely dips a toe into psychoanalytic currents. In the end it seems to contrast the mystified state of our current political settlement with the understandable desire for a fully unmasked and rational political future, free of these symbolic investments: but is this like the equally understandable and equally impossible hope of a full cure in analysis, as though the transference, fully appreciated, would dissolve and their 'majesties' would be seen entirely realistically at the end, neither more nor less? As though 'false consciousness' could give way to 'full and true consciousness' without the troubling presence of the unconscious. As though an age without political suppression would produce a psyche without repression. Reich did seem to think along these lines, but not Freud.
Presumably the same doubts about some final state of demystification must apply to group psychology. After all the tale of the child who reveals that the emperor has no clothes, is still a tale of the emperor. The question is whether it could ever be fully otherwise. The gist of these points is not to advocate irrationalism or mysticism either. Of course we need to work towards a more transparent, or in Nairn's terms, disenchanted, politics; that is the necessary if always partially unattainable task of analysis. Yet does the republican leader, however self-consciously prosaic, find himself or herself invested with something of a monarchical transference? The question of what Max Weber called 'charisma' is addressed, although far from resolved, in Freud's Group Psychology. Freud at least raises the question of whether there could ever be such a thing as a crystal-clear meaning for politics in which everyone would only bow down before or struggle towards what they consciously believe in; in which we would be subject to no group psychological illusion. Part of Freud's wider achievement has been to expose the fundamental instability of identity in the individual as well as profoundly to challenge the belief that mental life is reducible to conscious experience. Group Psychology raises related questions about the incoherence and mythic dimension of collective identities as well; it places the problem of transference within and between groups, from and towards institutions, firmly on the agenda. But at the same time the social and historical life of 'the group' is distinct from the existence of its members, more or less 'institutionalised' in ways which are not synonymous with or a mere magnification of the mental processes of any individual. In short, the more one reads Freud's text and the more one thinks about the issues it raises, the more profound the difficulties appear in drawing upon the language of identity. In Nairn's study of the monarchy, the narrator seeks, humorously, to enlighten, to de-mist the glass of our politics. Yet has written intriguingly that 'nationalism is the pathology of modem developmental history, as inescapable as "neurosis" in the individual, with much the same essential ambiguity attaching to it, a similar built-in capacity for descent into dementia, rooted in the dilemmas of helplessness thrust upon most of the world (the equivalent of infantilism for societies) and largely incurable' (The Break-Up of Britain, 1977). Presumably that unavoidable and incurable state implicates all of us and not just the enchanted others. Perhaps someone should take his remark seriously and see where it leads - which might be back in the direction of Freud's Group Psychology and questions of fantasy, transference and all of our dreamy condensations and displacements of personal meaning into and from the realm of the political.
Controversial attempts have been made to take the psychohistory of modern political enchantment a step further and to draw on psychoanalysis, as for instance in Klaus Theweleit's Male Fantasies (1987), which uses personal diaries as well as other written materials and images to grasp the psychic nature of Fascism, though it wanders further and further into a Reich-like lament for the generally cramped, sexually repressed nature of masculinity and modernity. Others have moved more cautiously, seeking to lay out many vignettes and fragments of national identities, rather than some overarching model of collective affects. The three-volume Patriotism: The Making and Unmaking of British National Identity (1989), edited by Raphael Samuel, is one such ensemble, whilst a French multi-tome collection of essays, initiated some years earlier by Pierre Nora, has the intriguing title, Les Lieux de Memoire (1984). There is fascinating material in these works, numerous case studies, and perhaps some attempt to think afresh the problematic juncture between the individual and the collective. But the enigma of what the first person plural of memory or of identification really means, remains ambiguous. We might want to discuss whether it is in principle answerable and if so what that would involve.

The crowd in history
The recent historical debate on nationalism rarely draws upon or even discusses that earlier world of crowd psychology, Freudian or pre-Freudian, with which the present paper is concerned. Moreover whilst both 'the crowd' and 'the nation' have generated an important historiography in the last twenty years, there seems to be little dialogue between the two. Not surprisingly, there are striking variations and developments within the secondary literature on the crowd. Some historians (such as J. S. McClelland in The Crowd and the Mob, 1989) begin with the Classics and work forwards - the 'Plato to Nato' tradition of political thought. But more conventionally both in the social theory of the nineteenth century and in the twentiethcentury exegesis of that theory, the concern with the crowd in history finds its real locus classicus in the French Revolution, whilst studies of the crowd in the history of discourse give central attention to the decades from the Paris Commune to the Great War when a self-styled science crystallised. Very often the crowd scientists gave a central place to re-interpreting the revolutionary experience in the context of the late nineteenth century: the Revolution seen in the light of its centenary.
In England, from Burke to Carlyle, Dickens and beyond, we have so many horrifying tales of the Revolution - often in the form of contrasts: individual versus mob; nation versus nation; the Revolution over there versus evolution over here. The tale of two cities, of two cultures, of merciful difference between their masses and ours is a recurrent supposition. So is the fear that the two forms of society or 'mob civilisations' will converge - precisely Carlyle's warning in his seminal essay 'Chartism' (1839). On the other hand, there was a growing realisation that, historically, industrial, urban and political change were massively reinforcing not only the specific street presence of sometimes menacing throngs but the sense of life itself as lived in a continual swarm of contacts. It is easy to pick out voices across the nineteenth century warning of the devastating and multiple consequences of this funnelling of populations into new ever more crowded spaces. One example: Carlyle again, in Latter Day Pamphlets (1850): 'they have oozed-in upon London, from the stygian quagmire of British industrial life; . . . This general well and cesspool once baled clean out today, will begin before night to fill itself anew.... Towards the same sad cesspool will these waste currents of human ruin ooze and gravitate as heretofore; except in draining the universal quagmire itself there is no remedy.... Not the cutting-loose of human ties, something far the reverse of that!'
The French Revolution and the industrial revolution, it was often argued on both sides of the Channel, made manifest the terrifying and humanly degrading power of the mob. Moreover the group was characteristically cast as symptom of a prior dis-aggregation of social bonds, rather than a rational actor or collective presence; the crowd marked the absence of reason and responsibility. Despite the retrospective enthusiasms of writers such as Michelet, the majority of nineteenth-century narrators and theorists of the crowd were explicitly hostile. The terror of the mobile vulgus powerfully informed the novel whether projected to an earlier age, as in say Dickens' Barnaby Rudge, or cast as closely contemporary in say Zola's Germinal or Gissing's Demos. Many artists and poets of course accepted the creative power of street life. Much of Walter Benjamin's classic study, Baudelaire (1973), after all, is about this ambivalent, creative pull of the teeming city streets. Writing Dombey and Son from Switzerland, Dickens acknowledged his need for the roar of London's human river, even though the tragic consequences of the movement of people to the city was a powerful representation in the novel itself. In Dickens' case, one of his daughters reported how he was 'sometimes obliged to seek the noise and hurry of a town to enable him to struggle through some difficult part of a long story . a long walk in the noisy streets would act upon him as a tonic'. Nevertheless in so much literature and social criticism of the made synonymous with mobs and both were often contrasted with the notion of a potentially more 'collected' individual.
It was to redeem the crowd from this type of condescension that historians such as Rude and Thompson sought to re-establish the crowd, pre- or post French Revolution, as scene of a kind of logic, a rationality, even a moral economy; the 'gathering' of people was not a process which by definition precluded thought or intention. It was not the 'mad and miserable beast', secretly asking only for benevolent rule, as proposed by Carlyle. The crowd was not anarchic, nor merely blind; it had customs in common; indeed often it formed to protest against the erasure of its 'birthrights' by the juggernaut of change. In the process of repudiating all these eighteenth and nineteenth-century horror stories, however, they by-passed the question of the unconscious altogether. In books such as The Crowd in History (1964), Rude sought to salvage the crowd from the horrified depiction to be found in Taine's vastly influential history of the Revolution - the 'origins of contemporary France', as his original title put it, which hung voluminously over post-Paris Commune French historiography. *{* One quotation to indicate the tone of Taine's work: 'Add to this the clamours, the drunkenness, the spectacle of destruction, the nervous tremor of the body strained beyond its powers of endurance, and we can comprehend how, from the peasant, the labourer, and the bourgeois, pacified and tamed by an old civilization, we see all of a sudden spring forth the barbarian, and still worse, the primitive animal, the grinning, sanguinary, wanton baboon, who chuckles while he slays, and gambols over the ruin he has accomplished.'}
If Rude and Thompson represent a particular tradition of historical work on the crowd, another tendency subsequently emerged which was much less concerned with social or popular history, as conceived in these terms, and much more with the historical process of writing the crowd: the aim here being less to substitute Taine with a truer and more transparent account of the group's nature, than to locate and analyse more fully the social, cultural, political and scientific context in which the mob lexicon of a Taine had become possible. * *{* * In place of an attempt to discover the true face of the crowd, commentators turned to the history of attempts to represent it. The shift from the social history of the human aggregate to the history of thought and imagery on the crowd usually centred on figures such as Taine, Tarde and Le Bon in the Third Republic (as for instance in Robert Nye's, The Origins of Crowd Psychology, 1975 or Susanna Barrow's Distorting Mirrors, 1981). Some of the recent studies have offered careful analyses of Scipio Sighele's contributions in Italy, alongside the better-known French material, but the time frame is still determined by the Paris Commune (as in Ginenken's useful survey, Crowds, Psychology and Politics, 1871-1899, 1992). Some critics have moved still further in the direction of the textuality of the crowd, exploring its motif within the work of single novelists (thus Naomi Schor's Zola's Crowds, 1978).}
I want to raise for debate the possibility that the grotesque, snobbish, elitist crowd theorists and historians of the late nineteenth century were really opening up something quite important: a half recognition of primitive forms of identification, psychological investment, even cannibalism. Admittedly, they could see these processes only as it were in Victorian 'anthropological' terms - as a function of other people over there in the crowd. Yet with their discussions of atavism, barbarism and the irrational, with their descriptions of the crowd's frenzy for possession, its enactment of annihilating fantasies and so on, they established an important discursive space which Freud would then commandeer in Group Psychology, bringing back their crowds of peasants and urban rioters to the question of the psychic per se. The castrating and cannibalistic potential of the mob is an important feature of the pre-Freudian analysis. Yet characteristically this was then distanced or repudiated as the stuff of primitive tribes or of women. Indeed the notion of the crowd as producing a specifically female atavism was crucial to this school of theorists. Apparently the female crowd often displayed a penchant for attacking the penis of its victims. 'Doctor him like a tomcat', scream the women in the mob of Zola's Germinal, before castrating their victim. The refrain 'the crowd is woman' or sometimes (in close connection), 'the crowd is the hysteric' echoed through the writings of the group psychologists in the decades before the Great War. Gabriel Tarde expressed a commonplace view when he declared in L'Opinion et la foule (1901) that 'by its routine caprice . . . its credulity, its excitability, its rapid leaps from fury to tenderness, from exasperation to bursts of laughter, the crowd is woman, even when it is composed, as almost always happens, of masculine elements.' Such representative views of the crowd were later taken over and glossed by, amongst others, Adolf Hitler. *{* In Mein Kampf, the reader is told about the feminine aspect of the people's craving for the masculine authority of the leader: 'The psyche of the people is not receptive to anything savouring of half-measures and weakness. Like a woman whose sensibilities are influenced less by abstract reasoning than by an undefinable longing governed by feeling, for the strength which completes what is to be done, and who would rather bow to the strong man than dominate the weakling, the people love a ruler more than a suppliant and feel more inwardly satisfied by doctrines which suffer no rival, than by an admission of liberal freedom'.}
Even when composed of men or 'masculine elements', the crowd is a woman, had declared Le Bon, Sighele and Tarde alike, in line with the crowd's linguistic gender in continental languages. Yet they also argued (drawing on the ideas of Herbert Spencer) that the crowd was a return to sameness. To be in a crowd was to lose (not, as arguably for Freud, to recapitulate) the structure of your identity. Perhaps the most vivid of all such descriptions of the crowd as a return to the inchoate mass, the homogeneous sticky beginnings of life, is provided by the new liberal, J. A. Hobson in his reflections on jingoism and mob trouble during the Boer War. In The Psychology of Jingoism (1901), he spoke of the crowd's temper as the 'democratic saturnalia of Ladysmith and Mafeking Days', the 'craving for blood', the 'black slime of [the Jingoist's] malice'; 'these ancient and abandoned stews of savage lust', a horrible, homogeneous brew.
Three years earlier, across the Atlantic, Dr Boris Sidis had produced a work entitled The Psychology of Suggestion. A Research into the Subconscious Nature of Man and Society (1898). Sidis gets a passing mention in Freud's Group Psychology. His book, introduced by William James, raised a series of questions about the lusts, cravings and panics of the crowd. Sidis argued that modernity involved new forms of mental strain. These were brought about by the apparently impossible physiological, psychological or neurological demands imposed on 'the masses' by a social order founded on technology and velocity. A general drift into 'automatic' sensation was occurring which was not a problem restricted to ephemeral street mobs but a phenomenon to be found in populations at large. Sidis gave late-nineteenth-century crowd psychology a distinctive inflection when he wrote of 'Financial Crazes', 'American Mental Epidemics' and the mob self that 'slumbers within the bosom of society'. Suggestibility was a massively diffused social and political problem, he warned. Moreover even the most composed individual really had the crowd's capacity burning within: 
[When] it rises to the surface and with the savage fury of a hurricane cripples and maims on its way everything it cannot destroy, menaces life, and throws the social order into the wildest confusion we put it down as mobs. We do not in the least suspect that the awful, destructive automatic spirit moves in the bosom of the peaceful crowd, reposes in the heart of the quiet assembly, and slumbers in the breast of the law-abiding citizen. 
From the problem of 'suggestion' in the Crusades to political stampedes today, from 'mediaeval mental epidemics' to contemporary hypnotism, humanity, according to Sidis, easily descends back towards animality, towards an instinctual world of wolves or panic-stricken horses. But modem conditions also induce automatism, indeed produce quite novel dangers for mental stability. The increasingly cerebral demands of society risk forcing the strained individual back towards the automatic, towards a catastrophic dissociation within: 'a dissociation of the primary and secondary subconscious selves'. The question of rule and authority was central to anti-democratic social theorists as to neurologists and psychologists in this period (sometimes they were one and the same). In each case what was feared was a potential collapse of the control mechanisms - whether in the 'democratic' body politic or in the body of the hypnotised individual and group: 'Hypnosis, we may say, is the more or less effected disaggregation of the controlling inhibitory centres from the rest of the nervous system.'
In the later Victorian period, madness too was cast as a return to the homogeneous, a loss of differentiation. New studies were proposing the brain itself be understood as analogous to a social organisation in which hierarchy and internal differentiation were absolutely vital. Herbert Spencer had argued that progress and evolution were a gradual passage from homogeneous to heterogeneous structures; for the crowd theorists, indebted to Spencer, the human aggregate precipitated a return of the homogeneous in the midst of the heterogeneous. The neurologist, Hughlings Jackson, in whom Freud was interested, compared madness in the individual to the loss of control in an elaborate team - each cortical layer disappearing and the system adapting as best it could to the loss. Disaggregation within the psyche seemed akin to a military crisis, analogous to the descent of control from highest to lowest in a navy or in a vast bureaucracy. Insanity was the 'taking to pieces' of the layers of the 'highest centres' to the point where no mind or consciousness remains and the person becomes merely 'a living creature'. Spencer and Jackson saw evolution and civilisation as founded on a progressive differentiation of structure - nature/ society evolving through the gathering heterogeneity of forms. Crowds, mass society, egalitarianism, even democracy itself, could be seen as an attack on this 'progressive' principle of heterogeneity. There was to be a faint touch of this in Freud's Group Psychology where the crowd was understood to have a specific homosexual dimension - in line with that longer tradition in which the crowd annihilates difference - difference even within itself. Freud also notes the theme of homogeneity in Le Bon: 'Le Bon thinks that the particular acquirements of individuals become obliterated in a group, and that in this way their distinctiveness vanishes. The racial unconscious emerges; what is heterogeneous is submerged in what is homogeneous. As we should say, the mental superstructure, the development of what in individuals shows such dissimilarities, is removed, and the unconscious foundations, which are similar in everyone, stand exposed to view.'
* * *
The question of how to integrate the material I describe here is one which needs more discussion. In particular, how might we go further in reading Freud in relation to the history of thought on group psychology? And how best should we assess the particular effects, and perhaps relative neglect, of this work by Freud in the subsequent psychoanalytic tradition? I suggest, however, that Group Psychology be regarded not simply as an historical document, but as providing a still relevant and rather disconcerting methodological impetus today. Furthermore, how useful are the conventional contrasts on which 'crowd history' or indeed 'social psychology' are founded? We often divide modern electoral politics from the earlier histories of the crowd, saying that the latter is the domain of specific 'face to face' gatherings, whilst contemporary democracy often seems to omit the crowd and to operate through 'private' conversation and listening (to the media, with its interviews, gossip, studio audiences and so forth) on the one side, the lonely ticking of boxes in private booths on the other. Even opinion polling is largely a telephone affair rather than a group 'show of hands'. Politics is so often characterised by the relative anonymity of the proceedings. But again Freud cuts against the grain of such thoughts, I suggest, raising the question of whether, psychically, the whole area of the political, regardless of its form, is as heavily invested with transference, with suggestibility, with the kind of emotional charge which can be seen in the association of the crowd and the leader, the hypnotist and the subject, or for that matter the analyst and the patient. I have sketched some of the ways in which, via Le Bon, via concepts from transference to hypnotism, from cannibalism to identification, Freud's Group Psychology raises some very provocative questions. Mass psychology, group psychology, perhaps in the end political psychology as well, all raise the problem of identification, of the hypnotic, the libidinal and the transferential. Instead of imagining the political and the libidinal as antithetical (something one might have expected if we worked backwards from Civilisation and its Discontents), Freud explores their interaction. I have suggested that Freud's text can be linked with the intellectual, military, political and cultural history of its time, but it opens up a wider question about how much politics is a field in which the stakes ultimately fuse love and hate, as well as other profound yearnings and affections. Freud writes between two world wars, after the Russian Revolution and on the brink of fascism. But the paper is pitched at a far more general level than any particular historical manifestation; some may feel that to be an insuperable weakness; Freud's vague conjuring of 'the army' rather than any historically located form of military organisation is evidently open to criticism. If we wanted to read Group Psychology in relation to fascism it would no doubt pay some dividends, but like the deeply gripping crowd story which closed the same decade, Thomas Mann's Mario and the Magician (1929), its resonances carry much further than the specific European historical context of its composition. In dialogue say with theories of nationalism, it might lead to new historical work. Imagined Communities deserves a sequel on imagined leaders as well as enemies, the complex dynamics in history between the group and its idealised or denigrated others. Various suggestive paths have already been opened up through this terrain; for instance Franco Fornari's The Psychoanalyis of War (1975) or, very differently, Luisa Passerini's intriguing study, Mussolini Imaginario (1991).
In the 1930s, pressed by the father of one of his patients who was a friend of Mussolini's to send an example of his work with a dedication to the Duce, the pioneer of psychoanalysis chose his dialogue with Einstein, 'Why War?' Freud's dedication offered 'the devoted greeting of an old man, who recognises the cultural hero in the ruler' (the details can be found in Gay's biography). It has been claimed, by the Italian analyst Edoardo Weiss, that this was a reference to Mussolini's major archaeological excavations in which Freud was keenly interested, but perhaps Freud's inscription could be seen as hinting the author's recognition of his own personal implication in the processes outlined in Group Psychology. There were always 'sources of the self' from which Freud generated his astonishingly fertile and extremely debatable social speculations. If a concern with Roman history was something the two men had in common, an interest in Gustave Le Bon and the psychology of groups was another, although their ends in reading cannot of course be equated. The church and the army offer the myth of an egalitarian love - everyone inside the group cherished equally, declared Freud. How much do those figures we dub 'politicians' necessarily provide (respond to the demand?) for that yearning and illusion too, even in less highly charged contexts than those of fascism's crowds and charismatic leadership? Many loose ends are left by Freud; many puzzling problems about the operations of love and magnetism in the field of the political. Hypnosis with all its libidinous complications, a practice which Freud had given up from a therapeutic point of view much earlier, returns in this 1921 investigation as the troubling enigma of enigmas inside group processes.
